NEP 40: Informational NEP about current DTypes (#15505)
numpy/numpy: doc/neps/nep-0040-legacy-datatype-impl.rst

================================================
NEP 40 — Legacy Datatype Implementation in NumPy
================================================

:title: Extensible Datatypes for NumPy
:Author: Sebastian Berg
:Author: Add...
:Status: Draft
:Type: Informational
:Created: 2019-07-17

Abstract
--------

In preparation of NumPy enhancement proposals 41, 42, and 43, this

> NEP details the current status of NumPy datatypes as of NumPy 1.19.

Reviewer: 19 -> 18 since I hope we get this all done for 1.19

It describes some of the technical aspects and concepts necessary to
motivate the following proposals.

Detailed Description
--------------------

Flexible Datatypes
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Some datatypes are inherently *flexible*.
Flexible here means the values representable by the datatype depend on the
specific instance.
As an example, ``datetime64[ns]`` can represent partial seconds which

> ``datetime64[s]`` cannot and ``"S8"`` can represent longer strings than ``"S4"``.

Author: Yeah, forgot about `np.flexible` (and ignored the C-API a bit, although it is mixed, e.g. `AdaptFlexible` of course also adepts the "generic" datetime). I guess I need a new word, hmmm.

> ``datetime64[s]`` cannot and ``"S8"`` can represent longer strings than ``"S4"``.

Author: Anyway, its incorrect here, you are right. Since it was supposed to describe the current state more. I think "variable lengths" is not a very important distinction for most code.

> ``datetime64[s]`` cannot and ``"S8"`` can represent longer strings than ``"S4"``.

Author: I think I will try to go with "parametric" for meaning "there is no canonical instance and different dtype instances may not be able to represent the exact same values". (used here: https://github.com/numpy/numpy/issues/12518#issuecomment-446059956) At least for now, of course "byte order" is also a parameter so to say, but...

(e.g. a python float ``3.`` will use it, but a NumPy ``np.float64(3.)`` will not).
Currently, such behaviour is partially supported even for user defined datatype.
*This support for user defined datatypes is considered unused legacy behaviour and may be removed without a transition period*.

The Object Datatype
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The object datatype currently serves as a generic fallback for any value
which is not representable otherwise.
However, due to not having a well defined type, it has some issues,
for example when an array is filled with Python sequences.
Further, without a well defined type, functions such as ``isnan()`` or ``conjugate()``
do not necessarily work for example for an array holding decimal values since they cannot
use ``decimal.Decimal`` specific API.
To improve this situation it seems desirable to make it easy to create
object dtypes with a specific python datatype.
This is listed here specifically, for two reasons:

1. Object datatypes require reference counting, which adds complexity to
   which we may not want to (initially) hide from general user defined datatypes.
2. In many use-cases it seems likely that a generic type specific solution

>    can be sufficient to improve type safety in user-code (e.g. by specifying

Author: Removed it, it is mainly a repetition anyway.

user DTypes and not made a secondary step, but instead be called instead of,
or be part of, the normal discovery.

Related Work
------------

* Julia has similar split of abstract and concrete types [julia-types]_. 

* In Julia promotion can occur based on abstract types. If a promoter is
  defined, it will cast the inputs and then Julia can then retry to find
  an implementation with the new values [julia-promotion]_.

* ``xnd-project`` (https://github.com/xnd-project) with ndtypes and gumath

  * The ``xnd-project`` solves a similar project, however, it does not use
    casting during function execution, so that it does not require a promotion
    step.

Existing ``PyArray_Descr`` fields
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Although not extensively used outside of NumPy itself, the currently
``PyArray_Descr`` is a public structure.
This includes the ``ArrFunctions`` structure stored in
the ``f`` field. 
Due to compatibility they may need remain supported for a very long time,
with the possibility of replacing them by functions that dispatch to a newer API.

The access to these structures will have to be deprecated.

Open Issues
-----------

> ``np.load`` (and others) currently translate all extension dtypes to void dtypes.

Reviewer 2: Isn't it strictly the saving that does the translation?

This means they cannot be stored using the ``npy`` format.
If we wish to add support for ``npy`` format in user datatypes, a new protocol

> will have to be designed to achieve this.

Reviewer 2: Do you mean the byte contents of the array?

We could largely achieve that today if we used `pickle` to serialize the dtype instead of a custom text format. I suspect that using `pickle.dump` instead of `np.save` already does the right thing.

The additional existence of masked arrays and especially masked datatypes
within Pandas has the interesting implications of interoperability.
Even though NumPy itself may never have true support for masked values,
the datatype system could grow it.
This means support for datatypes where the actual mask information is not

> stored as part of the datatype, but as part of a bit array in the array object.

Reviewer 2: This seems to be a special case combining:
* having field-clustered storage for structured dtypes, rather than element-clustered (struct of arrays vs array of structs)
* support for bit-strides

Both of these would require fairly fundamental changes to the semantics of `arr.strides` and `arr.view`, which sounds like a can of worms best left unopened.

> stored as part of the datatype, but as part of a bit array in the array object.

Author: Ah, to clarify that. I have no intention to even think about opening the can of worms for numpy. I noted it, because pandas has/will have such types, and if it is much more straight forward, we could think about helping out there.

.. _pandas_extension_arrays: https://pandas.pydata.org/pandas-docs/stable/development/extending.html#extension-types

.. _xarray_dtype_issue: https://github.com/pydata/xarray/issues/1262

.. _pygeos: https://github.com/caspervdw/pygeos

.. _new_sort: https://github.com/numpy/numpy/pull/12945

.. _gh-12518: https://github.com/numpy/numpy/issues/12518

.. _value_based: Value based promotion denotes the behaviour that NumPy will inspect the value of scalars (and 0 dimensional arrays) to decide what the output dtype should be. ``np.array(1)`` typically gives an "int64" array, but ``np.array([1], dtype="int8") + 1`` will retain the "int8" of the first array.

.. _safe_casting: Safe casting denotes the concept that the value held by one dtype can be represented by another one without loss/change of information. Within current NumPy there are two slightly different usages. First, casting to string is considered safe, although it is not safe from a type perspective (it is safe in the sense that it cannot fail); this behaviour should be considered legacy. Second, int64 is considered to cast safely to float64 even though float64 cannot represent all int64 values correctly.

> .. _flexible_dtype: A flexible dtype is a dtype for which conversion is not always safely possible. This is for example the case for current string dtypes, which can have different lengths. It is also true for datetime64 due to its attached unit. A non-flexible dtype should typically have a canonical representation (i.e. a float64 may be in non-native byteorder, but the default is native byte order).

Reviewer 2: This definition is not consistent with `PyArray_ISFLEXIBLE`, which includes only void, str, and bytes.

================================================

:title: Legacy Datatype Implementation in NumPy
:Author: Sebastian Berg
:Status: Draft
:Type: Informational
:Created: 2019-07-17

Abstract
--------

As a preparation to further NumPy enhancement proposals 41, 42, and 43. This
NEP details the current status of NumPy datatypes as of NumPy 1.18.
It describes some of the technical aspects and concepts that
motivated the other proposals.

Detailed Description
--------------------

This section describes some central concepts and provides a brief overview
of the current implementation of dtypes as well as a discussion.
In many cases subsections will be split roughly to first describe the
current implementation and then follow with an "Issues and Discussion" section.

Parametric Datatypes
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Some datatypes are inherently *parametric*. All ``np.flexible`` scalar
types are attached to parametric datatypes (string, bytes, and void).
The class ``np.flexible`` for scalars is a superclass for the data types of
variable length (string, bytes,
and void). This distinction is similarly exposed by the C-Macros
``PyDataType_ISFLEXIBLE`` and ``PyTypeNum_ISFLEXIBLE``.

> For instance, ``"S8"`` can represent longer strings than ``"S4"``.

Reviewer 2: This sentence feels a little out of place here, but probably is sensible to work in somehow.

The basic numerical datatypes are not flexible (do not inherit from

> ``npflexible``). Float64, Float32, etc. do have a byte order, but the described

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
``np.flexible``). ``float64``, ``float32``, etc. do have a byte order, but the described
```

values are unaffected by it, and it is always possible to cast them to the
native, canonical representation without any loss of information.

The concept of flexibility can be generalized to parametric datatypes.
For example the private ``AdaptFlexibleDType`` function also accepts the
naive datetime dtype as input to find the correct time unit.

> The datetime dtype is thus parametric not in the storage, but instead in

Reviewer 2: Perhaps:
```suggestion
The datetime dtype is thus parametric not in the size of it's storage, but instead in
```

what the stored value represents.
Currently ``np.can_cast("datetime64[s]", "datetime64[ms]", casting="safe")``
returns true, although it is unclear that this is desired or generalizes
to possible future data types such as physical units.

Thus we have data types (mainly strings) with the properties that:

1. Casting is not always safe (``np.can_cast("S8", "S4")``)
2. Array coercion should be able to discover the exact dtype, such as for

>    ``np.array(["str1", 123.], dtype="S")`` where NumPy discovers the

Reviewer 2: Perhaps `12.34` would make this example clearer

   resulting dtype as ``"S5"``.

>    (Without ``dtype="S"`` such behaviour is currently ill defined [gh-15327]_.)

Reviewer 2: Do you mean "if the dtype argument is ommitted"? The behavior is not ill-defined if `np.object_` is passed, for instance.

numerical ones, which is evident in the complicated output type discovery
of universal functions.

Value Based Casting
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Casting is typically defined between two types:
A type is considered to cast safely to a second type when the second type
can represent all values of the first without loss of information.
NumPy may inspect the actual value to decide
whether casting is safe or not.

This is useful for example in expressions such as::

    arr = np.array([1, 2, 3], dtype="int8")
    result = arr + 5
    assert result.dtype == np.dtype("int8")
    # If the value is larger, the result will change however:
    result = arr + 500
    assert result.dtype == np.dtype("int16")

In this expression, the python value (which originally has no datatype) is
represented as an ``int8`` or ``int16`` (the smallest possible data type).

NumPy currently does this even for NumPy scalars and zero dimensional arrays,
so that replacing ``5`` with ``np.int64(5)`` or ``np.array(5, dtype="int64")``
will lead to the same results, and thus ignores the existing datatype.
The same logic also applies to floating point scalars, which are allowed to
lose precision.

> The behavior is not used when both inputs are scalars.

Reviewer 2: Can you give an example here?

must initially fully support the current behavior.
A main difficulty is that for example the value ``156`` can be represented
by ``np.uint8`` and ``np.int16``.
The result depends on the "minimal" representation in the context of the
conversion (for ufuncs the context may depend on the loop order).

The Object Datatype
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The object datatype currently serves as a generic fallback for any value
which is not otherwise representable.
However, due to not having a well defined type, it has some issues,
for example when an array is filled with Python sequences::

    >>> l = [1, [2]]
    >>> np.array(l, dtype=np.object_)
    array([1, list([2])], dtype=object)  # a 1d array

    >>> a = np.empty((), dtype=np.object_)
    >>> a[...] = l
    ValueError: assignment to 0-d array  # ???
    >>> a[()] = l
    >>> a
    array(list([1, [2]]), dtype=object)

Without a well defined type, functions such as ``isnan()`` or ``conjugate()``
do not necessarily work, but can work for a :class:`decimal.Decimal`.
To improve this situation it seems desirable to make it easy to create
object dtypes that represent a specific python datatype and stores its object

> inside the array in the form of pointer to python `PyOjbect`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
inside the array in the form of pointer to python `PyObject`.
```

  return the scalar instead of a 0D array.
  This is problematic if multiple users independently decide to implement
  for example a DType for ``decimal.Decimal``.

Current ``dtype`` Implementation
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Currently ``np.dtype`` is a Python class with its instances being the
``np.dtype(">float64")``, etc. instances.
To set the actual behaviour of these instances, a prototype instance is stored
globally and looked up based on the ``dtype.typenum``. The singleton is used
where possible. Where required it is copied and modified, for instance to change
endianess.
For parametric datatypes (strings, void, datetime, and timedelta) additionally
the string lengths, fields, or datetime unit needs to be set, so they create
another instance rather than using a singleton.
All current datatypes within NumPy further support setting a metadata field
during creation which can be set to an arbitrary dictionary value, but seems
rarely used in practice (one recent and prominent user is h5py).

Many datatype specific functions are defined within a C structure called
:c:type:`PyArray_ArrFuncs`, which is part of each ``dtype`` instance and

> has a similarity to Pythons ``PyNumberMethods``.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
has a similarity to Python's ``PyNumberMethods``.
```
Can we make this work as a link?

converting to bool, or sorting.
Since some of these functions are vectorized operations, operating on more than
one element, they fit the model of ufuncs and do not need to be defined on the
datatype in the future.
For example the ``np.clip`` function was previously implemented using
``PyArray_ArrFuncs`` and is now implemented as ufuncs.

Discussion and Issues
"""""""""""""""""""""

A further issue with the current implementation of the functions on the dtype
is that, unlike methods,
they are not passed an instance of the dtype when called.
Instead, in many cases, the array which is being operated on is passed in
and typically only used to extract the datatype again.
A future API should likely stop passing in the full array object.
Since it will be necessary to fall back to the old definitions for
backward compatibility, the array object may not be available.
However, passing a "fake" array in which mainly the datatype is defined
is probably be a sufficient workaround
(see backward compatibility; alignment information may sometimes also be desired).

Although not extensively used outside of NumPy itself, the currently
``PyArray_Descr`` is a public structure.

> This is especially also true for the ``ArrFunctions`` structure stored in

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This is especially also true for the ``PyArray_ArrFuncs`` structure stored in
```

the ``f`` field.
Due to compatibility they may need to remain supported for a very long time,
with the possibility of replacing them by functions that dispatch to a newer API.

However, in the long run access to these structures will probably have to
be deprecated.

NumPy Scalars and Type Hierarchy
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

As a side note to the above datatype implementation: unlike the datatypes,

> the NumPy scalars currently **do** provide a type hierarchy, including abstract

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
the NumPy scalars currently **do** provide a type hierarchy, including abstract
```

types such as ``np.inexact`` (see figure below).
In fact, some control flow within NumPy currently uses
``issubclass(a.dtype.type, np.inexact)``.

.. figure:: _static/nep-0040_dtype-hierarchy.png

   **Figure:** Hierarchy of type objects reproduced from the reference
   documentation. Some aliases such as ``np.intp`` are excluded. Datetime
   and timedelta are not shown.

NumPy scalars try to mimic zero dimensional arrays with a fixed datatype.
For the numerical (and unicode) datatypes, they are further limited to
native byte order.

Current Implementation of Casting

> ^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Reviewer 2: For my own reference: made it this far, will come back to the rest later.

of ufuncs with different types (such as adding integer and floating point numbers).

Casting tables determine whether casting is possible or not.
However, these cannot handle the parametric dtypes such as strings.
The logic for parametric datatypes is defined mainly in ``PyArray_CanCastTo``
and currently cannot be customized for user defined datatypes.

The actual casting has two distinct parts:

1. ``copyswap``/``copyswapn`` are defined for each dtype and can handle
   byte-swapping for non-native byte orders as well as unaligned memory.
2. The generic casting code is provided by C functions which know how to
   cast aligned and contiguous memory from one dtype to another
   (both in native byte order).
3. C-level functions can be registered to cast aligned and contiguous memory
   from one dtype to another.
   The function may be provided with both arrays (although the parameter
   is sometimes ``NULL`` for scalars).
   NumPy will ensure that these functions receive native byte order input.
   The current implementation stores the functions either in a C-array
   on the datatype which is cast, or in a dictionary when casting to a user
   defined datatype.

> When casting (small) buffers will be used when necessary to ensure

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
When casting, (small) buffers are used when necessary to ensure
```

> contiguity, alignment or native byte order.

Reviewer 3: or -> and?

In this case first ``copyswapn`` is called to and ensures that the cast function

> can handle the input.

Reviewer 3: ``copyswapn`` is typically responsible for this preprocessing to ensure these conditions are met for the subsequent casting machinery.

Generally NumPy will thus perform casting as chain of the three functions

> ``in_copyswapn -> castfunc -> out_copyswapn``.

Reviewer 3: This sentence is a bit redundant given the numbered points above, though I actually think this is more clear. Consider consolidating this section a bit.

The above multiple functions are wrapped into a single function (with metadata)
that handles the cast and is used for example during the buffered iteration used
by ufuncs.
This is the mechanism that is always used for user defined datatypes.
For most dtypes defined within NumPy itself, more specialized code is used to

> find define a function to do the actual cast

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
find a function to do the actual cast
```

(defined by the private ``PyArray_GetDTypeTransferFunction``).
This mechanism replaces most of the above mechanism and provides much faster

> casts for for example when the inputs are not contiguous in memory.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
casts for example when the inputs are not contiguous in memory.
```

However, it cannot be extended by user defined datatypes.

Related to casting, we currently have a ``PyArray_EquivTypes`` function which

> indicate that a *view* is sufficient (and thus no cast is necessary).

Reviewer 3: Is this another example of functionality that is not available to user-defined types?

DType handling in Universal functions
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Universal functions are implemented as instances of the ``numpy.UFunc`` class
with an ordered

> list of datatype specific (based on the dtype typecode character, not datatype

Reviewer 3: ordered-list, datatype-specific

instances) implementations, each with a signature and a function pointer.
This list of implementations can be seen with ``ufunc.types`` where
all implementations are listed with their C-style typecode signatures.
For example::

    >>> np.add.types
    [...,
     'll->l',
     ...,
     'dd->d',
     ...]

Each of these signatures is associated with a single inner-loop function defined
in C, which does the actual calculation, and may be called multiple times.

The main step in finding the correct inner-loop function is to call a
:c:type:`PyUFunc_TypeResolutionFunc` which recieves the input dtypes

> (in the form of the actual input arrays)

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
:c:type:`PyUFunc_TypeResolutionFunc` which retrieves the input dtypes from 
the input arrays
```

Author: (added "provided")

> and will find the full type signature (including output dtype) to be executed.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
and will determine the full type signature (including output dtype) to be executed.
```

the call ``fraction_divide(4, 5)`` (with no specific output dtype) will fail
because the loop that
includes the user datatype ``Fraction`` (as output) can only be found if any of
the inputs is already a ``Fraction``.
``fraction_divide(4, 5, dtype=Fraction)`` can be made to work, but is inconvenient.

Typically, dispatching is done by finding the first loop that matches. A match
is defined as: all inputs (and possibly outputs) can
be cast safely to the signature typechars (see also the current implementation
section).
However, in some cases safe casting is problematic and thus explicitly not
allowed.
For example the ``np.isnat`` function is currently only defined for
datetime and timedelta,
even though integers are defined to be safely castable to timedelta.
If this was not the case, calling
``np.isnat(np.array("NaT", "timedelta64").astype("int64"))`` would currently
return true, although the integer input array has no notion of "not a time".
If a universal function, such as most functions in ``scipy.special``, is only
defined for ``float32`` and ``float64`` it will currently automatically
cast a ``float16`` silently to ``float32`` (similarly for any integer input).

> This ensures successful execution, but allows a change in the output dtype

Reviewer 3: is "allows" the right word? I'm not sure I understand the last sentence.

when support for new data types is added to a ufunc.

In general the order in which loops are registered is important.
However, this is only reliable if all loops are added when the ufunc is first defined.
Additional loops added when a new user datatypes is imported

> must not be sensitive to the order in which imports occur.

Reviewer 3: I'm not sure I'm understanding this correctly. What I gather is that the ufunc type resolution is sensitive to the ordering of the loops during the type lookup, and this is another feature of the current dtype system that complicates type resolution for new, user-defined types.

Author: Basically, order having an affect is not desirable. A new, improved design (which is necessary, this being one of the issues) should fix that problem.

   For example they may provide a function which return/select a loop
   when there is no exact matching loop available.
2. Define a total ordering of all implementations/loops, probably based on
   "safe casting" semantics, or semantics similar to that.

While option 2 may be less complex to reason about it remains to be seen
whether it is sufficient for all (or most) use cases.

Adjustment of Parametric output DTypes in UFuncs
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

A second step necessary for parametric dtypes is currently performed within
the ``TypeResolver``:
the datetime and timedelta datatypes have to decide on the correct parameter
for the operation and output array.
This step also needs to double check that all casts can be performed safely,
which by default means that they are "same kind" casts.

Issues and Discussion
"""""""""""""""""""""

Fixing the correct output dtype is currently part of the type resolution.
However, it is a distinct step and should probably be handled as such after
the actual type/loop resolution has occurred.

As such this step may move from the dispatching step (described above) to
the implementation-specific code described below.

> DType specific Implementation of the UFunc

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
DType-specific Implementation of the UFunc
```

^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Once the correct implementation/loop is found, UFuncs currently call
a single *inner-loop function* which is written in C.
This may be called multiple times to do the full calculation and it has
little or no information about the current context. It also has a void
return value.

Issues and Discussion
"""""""""""""""""""""

Parametric datatypes may require passing
additional information to the inner-loop function to decide how to interpret
the data.

> This is the reason why currently no universal functions for strings dtypes

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
This is the reason why currently no universal functions for ``string`` dtypes
```

This means allowing users to pass in and out information from the inner-loop
function more easily, while *not* providing the input array objects.
Most likely this will involve:

* Allowing the execution of additional code before the first and after
  the last inner-loop call.
* Returning an integer value from the inner-loop to allow stopping the
  iteration early and possibly propagate error information.
* Possibly, to allow specialized inner-loop selections. For example currently
  ``matmul`` and many reductions will execute optimized code for certain inputs.
  It may make sense to allow selecting such optimized loops beforehand.
  Allowing this may also help to bring casting (which uses this heavily) and
  ufunc implementations closer.

The issues surrounding the inner-loop functions have been discussed in some
detail in the github issue gh-12518_ .

Reductions use an "identity" value.
This is currently defined once per ufunc, regardless of the ufunc dtype signature.
For example  ``0`` is used for ``sum``, or ``math.inf`` for ``min``.
This works well for numerical datatypes, but is not always appropriate for other dtypes.

> In general it should be possible to provide a dtype specific identity to the

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
In general it should be possible to provide a dtype-specific identity to the
```

ufunc reduction.

Datatype Discovery during Array Coercion
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

> When calling ``np.array(...)``, coercing general python object to a NumPy array,

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
When calling ``np.array(...)`` to coerce a general Python object to a NumPy array,
```

all objects need to be inspected to find the correct dtype.
The input to ``np.array()`` are potentially nested Python sequences which hold
the final elements as generic Python objects.
NumPy has to unpack all the nested sequences and then inspect the elements.

> The final datatype is found by iterating all elements which will end up

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The final datatype is found by iterating over all elements which will end up
```

``PyArray_AdaptFlexibleDType`` is called and effectively inspects all values
using DType specific logic.
That is:

* Strings will use ``str(element)`` to find the length of most elements
* Datetime64 is capable of coercing from strings and guessing the correct unit.

Discussion and Issues
"""""""""""""""""""""

It seems probable that during normal discovery, the ``isinstance`` should rather
be strict ``type(element) is desired_type`` checks.
Further, the current ``AdaptFlexibleDType`` logic should be made available to
user DTypes and not be a secondary step, but instead replace, or be part of,
the normal discovery.

Related Issues
--------------

``np.save`` currently translates all user-defined dtypes to void dtypes.
This means they cannot be stored using the ``npy`` format.
This is not an issue for the python pickle protocol, although it may require
some thought if we wish to ensure that such files can be loaded securely
without the possibility of executing malicious code
(i.e. without the ``allow_pickle=True`` keyword argument).

The additional existence of masked arrays and especially masked datatypes

> within Pandas has the interesting implications of interoperability.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
within Pandas has interesting implications for interoperability.
```

Since mask information is often stored separately, its handling requires
support by the container (array) object.
NumPy itself does not provide such support, and is not expected to add it
in the foreseeable future.
However, if in the interest of interoperability additions to the datatypes
within NumPy are helpful, doing such additions could be an option even if

> they are not used by NumPy itself.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
However, if such additions to the datatypes within NumPy would improve
interoperability they could be considered even if
they are not used by NumPy itself.
```

Related Work
------------

* Julia types are an interesting blueprint for a type hierarchy, and define
  abstract and concrete types [julia-types]_. 

* In Julia promotion can occur based on abstract types. If a promoter is
  defined, it will cast the inputs and then Julia can then retry to find
  an implementation with the new values [julia-promotion]_.

* ``xnd-project`` (https://github.com/xnd-project) with ndtypes and gumath

  * The ``xnd-project`` is similar to NumPy and defines data types as well
    as the possibility to extend them. A major difference is that it does
    not use promotion/casting within the ufuncs, but instead requires explicit
    definition of ``int32 + float64 -> float64`` loops.

Discussion
----------

> There have been many discussion about the current state and what a future

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
There have been many discussions about the current state and what a future
```

datatype system may look like.
The full list of these discussion is long and some are lost to time,
the following provides a subset for more recent ones:

> * Draft on NEP by Stephan Hoyer after a developer meeting (was updated on the next developer meeting) https://hackmd.io/6YmDt_PgSVORRNRxHyPaNQ

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* Draft NEP by Stephan Hoyer after a developer meeting (was updated on the next developer meeting) https://hackmd.io/6YmDt_PgSVORRNRxHyPaNQ
```
